Well, what's a meeting?
Well you might be scoffing at me now,
thinking that of course you know what a meeting is.
I might go out on a limb here, but I think maybe you might not know,
especially what I'm calling a formal and successful meeting.
As a consultant I have been in many companies,
meeting many people and attending their meetings,
it is rare that I see a meeting conducted well.
So that's what I mean by what's a meeting here, and let's talk about it.
Okay the purpose.
Well the purpose of a meeting is to get something done, right.
Why have it unless you want to get something done.
And the fact that we will be with other people means that you
need them in order to get something done.
You're not inviting them there just for the heck of it.
Now let's talk about some benefits.
For me getting decisions made and commitments made for further actions
identified and assigned is the most critical in a work environment.
Alignment.
Rather than spending excessive time reading through email
chains and clarifying their meetings,
meetings are often the most effective means to ensure alignment of people,
alignment of thought and alignment of action,
basically getting everyone on the same page.
So I like getting people together and really making
sure we're on track to move forward.
Miscommunication, whether it's in IT or any business environment,
is probably a real death nail on so many projects.
Okay, brainstorming.
When a solution is not readily available or you need innovative concepts,
a brainstorming meeting may just be what the doctor order,
so I like meetings for brainstorming as well.
And lastly sometimes it's just plain education.
When the education of individuals is necessary,
meetings are often the best solution for that.
This is not the same as a class per say,
but more targeted,
such as when educating a group on changes in the
business goals and how it will affect them.
And again, that's the purpose and the outcome of the meeting.
Now let's look at what you might need to hold an
effective and productive meeting.
Now there are many forums which you will be leading
meetings and let's discuss them briefly.
Now they'll be team meetings, so you'll have many team meetings with,
well your team.
And they may be staff meetings or special meetings or
requirements meetings and things like that.
You will also have meetings with your management.
You'll have meetings with your boss,
maybe with your boss's boss or other senior management.
You will also have meetings with your customers.
Maybe with the end users of the systems you provide or maybe product owners
in a scrum model or the management of those entities.
Many of these meetings may be requirements gathering,
preparing for a pilot implementation, going over system defects,
project planning, and training to name a few.
You may have meetings also with your suppliers or external companies
or maybe internal departments that provide you products or services
to help you and your team get jobs done.
Also another meeting forum will be interviewing for new hires.
As we discussed in another module,
you'll be having meetings with potential new hires to add to your team.
Also,
individual meetings with your team in terms of conducting performance reviews.
You'll be meeting with each person one or more times a year and spending
quality time with them about their performance and careers.
Now what do all these have in common?
For each you will need to plan the meeting,
lead the meeting, and perform the follow up activities of the meeting.
So let's talk about those requirements and responsibilities
you will have in each and every forum you'll have in
conducting your business as a manager.
Now for every meeting, I believe, you must plan the following.
Of course there's always going to be the purpose,
clearly identify the purpose of the meeting and the outcome wanted.
Agenda, list all the agenda items and for every agenda item,
who do you think will speak on that item and maybe about how
much time each agenda item might take,
so remember we're going to have a time fence,
typically meetings are about an hour or so.
Attendees, who do you want to be there?
Don't over invite.
That's wasteful of time and sometimes gets unruly, keep it to a minimum.
Of course you're always going to pick a date and a time that makes sense
so you can maximize the attendees that you need there.
You're going to send out a meeting request and use Outlook and Exchange,
whatever tool you use, use that tool,
but make it real clear and you can also include the agenda or other
pertinent information along with the meeting request.
And of course, meeting requests will also have locations,
but think about it ahead of time,
is this going to be a physical meeting or virtual or maybe a little of both.
Remember, some meetings make more sense to be physically together,
sometimes that face to face is much more productive and
sometimes virtual is just fine or a combination of.
Alright now let's look at your leadership responsibilities for formal meetings.
Also I'd like to call your attention to the demo.
zip file that comes with this module.
I have a sample template in there for a meeting agenda,
so it gives you a good start,
you're welcome to change it any way you want to that makes
sense for you and your organization,
but it should help out right away to kind of jumpstart
what a good agenda should contain.
Now for every meeting you must perform these leadership duties,
step your way through the agenda, take notes.
You will take notes period.
Use pencil, paper, pad, or your laptop, you must take really good notes.
Document action items for each topic on the agenda,
who's responsible for it, what they need to do and the due date,
and document all agreements and all decisions made with their rationale.
A lot of times people say, yeah I agree to do that,
but why was the reason for that?
Or why was the reason for not doing something?
It's important to have a little sentence that says,
here's the rationale that we discussed.
Document all issues, you know, what are the issues facing the team?
Some will get assigned as action items and some may be
on the list for the next meeting.
As a leader you want to promote active discussions,
don't tell people what to do, ask for their inputs.
You may already have an idea, don't just dump it out there,
let's wait, be patient for what others are going to add and contribute.
You don't want to say, Lauren, any questions?
Well that doesn't work.
Some people may be on the quiet or shy side, and may have a lot to contribute.
So be a leader and ask questions, such as,
Lauren, do you have any inputs on the new database design?
Or Lauren, you mentioned earlier about a potential issue,
do you think based on the new database design that the issue is resolved?
Thinks like that.
So nice questions, friendly questions,
and easy for them to answer and be engaged.
Also you want to be inclusive to all attendees, that is, don't overlook anyone.
Remember you invited them for a reason.
You need something from them for a successful outcome, don't overlook anyone.
And engage your audience, this is challenging.
Eye contact is important.
Listening is important.
Ensure the meeting has a good flow and a good cadence.
Create an atmosphere of unselfish contributions and
you will have greater success.
Also, end on time, which means begin on time as well.
Hold tight to your agenda and the time allotted for each agenda item.
You are running the meeting,
you are in control and therefore you are responsible for its total success.
Lastly do a recap, that is quickly recap your notes,
action items, agreements,
also go around the room to ensure everyone has had a
chance to contribute any ending comments.
Alright, now let's look at your follow up activities for a meeting.
Follow up, so after every meeting you must do the following,
send out meeting notes ASAP,
it is critical that you send out meeting notes as soon as possible
within a few hours and no more than the next day,
while still fresh in your mind and in people's mind.
Okay reuse your agenda,
and what I mean by that is use your agenda as a template and fill in the blanks,
that is the space between each item with your notes under each agenda item.
No need to have these disjointed.
So it gives you a nice checklist of collecting your
notes and putting them under each one,
especially if you use your laptop while the meeting is
underway and you can collect the notes,
at least in a kind of a quick and dirty way,
and then later clean them up before you send out.
Send out your meeting minutes or notes as an email and what I mean is
that send out as text in the body of the email.
Or you can send out as an attachment where the
attachment is say a Word document, for example,
and that collects and contains all of your notes and agenda items,
et cetera.
Now sometimes people do not want to click and open an attachment,
either they are too busy or they're on the phone,
so I tend to like to have my notes as text in the body of an email,
so once they open the email it's easy to browse through,
agree, disagree, hit reply.
You're going to get, likely, more feedback on your notes than otherwise.
If it's an attachment I have to detach or I have to click on it and then
I have to open it and then I have to print it maybe,
so sometimes, believe it or not, I know that doesn't sound very complicated,
that's a barrier for some people to actually read your minutes.
Because you want their concurrence or you'll want their ideas about
what you may have missed and things like that.
Now attach any supporting documents if any,
maybe it's a requirements document or an issue list or a
budget spreadsheet and things like that,
now then you want to send out the next meeting request,
and include, of course, date, time, location.
This may or may not yet include the agenda, of course.
But I like to send out a request quickly so they are saving the date,
so to speak,
and then later I can update the meeting request with
the agenda content and in my case, I use Outlook,
Outlook with automatically send out a revised meeting request,
which will contain the agenda within that.
Or you can certainly send out the agenda as just another email.
Either way works fine. Now let's take a moment and look at formal emails.